This is a CBC podcast. Good morning, Ariadne e. It's time to wake up. It is seven A. M. On October fifteenth, twenty fifty. The high end Vancouver will be fifteen degrees. There is an air quality warning in place due to prescribed burn. Garibaldi masks are recommended. Do you know when this burn is supposed to end? Mom was going to take us hiking this weekend. The prescribed burn is expected to last two days. Smoke warning is expected to be lifted by noon tomorrow. Thiss is twenty fifty degrees of change. A CBC Vancouver podcast exploring how climate change will shape our province by the middle of the century. I'm CBC meteorologist Johanna Waxed. We know firsthand how devastating a wildfire Khun B but by twenty fifty will be facing more fires and more disasters like the wildfire that ripped through Fort McMurray, Alberta, destroying homes and displacing nearly ninety thousand people. From where I'm standing there ten meters high in the air, just right along the highway. The heat is just absolutely indescribable right now. They would just say it was the biggest smoke I've ever seen. It was just black, like gods. It didn't leave and let us take our things when we asked, so we lost everything. Well, that's what we have on our backs. I was part of the CDC team who covered the Fort McMurray fire and after a week of intense fire weather forecasting, shifting winds, bone dry conditions and flames so intense they were creating their own lightning. I was sent to the scene no standing on a burn track just outside of Fort McMurray, with smoke still rising in the distance. But it was meeting the people at the evacuation centers, the airport, the gas stations that I will never forget, people who had lost everything. People who worked tirelessly to help in any way they could. People who knew their community would be changed forever. And people who recognized me and ran over to ask if I could tell from the satellite images if they're home had been lost to the fire. And I could. Climate change means BC will be facing a longer, more explosive fire season, and that will have profound effects on our forests, our economy and our livelihood. We are in lower Trepagnier Creek, just outside of Peach Land in the Okanagan southern interior BC in what is what. He was historically kind of dry ponderosa pine grassland forest. And today it's more of a Ponderosa pine Douglas fir Forrest, So it's changed over time. This is Bob Gray. He's a fire ecologist who studies the behavior of wildfires. And he's brought us here to a clearing near a school in Peach Land to show us what a fire prone ecosystem looks like as we look to the future, well, the research is suggesting that we're going to see significantly longer fire seasons. And that means that Mohr fuels were dry out, become available to burn. We'll have hotter fires because they'll have longer residents. Times crews will have a more difficult time catching fires. Right now. Success rates about ninety seven percent. If we have a longer fire season, we can expect that the success rate will diminish and so more fires will get away. We'll have larger fires, so all in all we can see longer fire seasons. Lots more fire in the landscape and the consequences of that with some of the modeling you've been looking at and the way they things have already begun to increases. Faras more extreme Wildfire Days, NBC. Do we have any sense? Like a range of what percentage of extreme fire days were talking about in twenty fifty, some of the models air, suggesting that on the coast we may see coast and temperate force, we may see an increase of one to two days per year kind of extreme conditions. Now that's kind of an average annual situation. We will likely see years like twenty fourteen more frequently where twenty fourteen was was a bad year, coastal fire wise and that stretched out over ten or twenty years becomes an average of one additional day, that kind of personality of it. In the interior, we can expect to see that fire season increased by months. I think over the last two decades, some of the research is suggesting the fire season has extended by thirty to fifty days, so we would expect to see that increase a bit more. The North is still a little bit shady about the effects of the model some are suggesting could get wetter. It could get warmer. The pattern we're seeing right now the North is that longer fire seasons for sure. The snow's coming off quicker. It's drawing out quicker and the fire's air starting sooner. So and I guess that sort of applies to an increase in triggers a cz well, possibly mohr thunderstorms and maybe more human started fires? Well, certainly if you have a longer fire season, it's only a matter of probabilities if you have x number of open ignitions on the landscape cigarettes, car exhaust, catalytic converters, everything else on DH fuels are available. It's just a matter of simple probabilities. You're going to have more ignitions. Some of the research is suggesting we're likely to see more lightning. Another thing that's come out of recent research is atmospheric pressure anomalies. Changing, too. So Maura, these blocking high, so sort of stagnating conditions, drying things out but then also like stronger highs. Deeper lows in this Grady Int, resulting in when a system moves on is extremely strong winds. So it's really a bad situation that we're looking at. Are you worried that will see period? But also before we get there, that will Seymour situations like for Memory and cologne? A few years ago, I think we definitely will. I mean, as things dry out, our ability to catch ceasefires eyes like I says, getting more difficult. We're going to see big, big hot fires, very expensive fires in the future. I mean, with all the dead pine we have NBC. We've had some success and harvesting it, but it's a big, broad plateau, and it wouldn't be out the question to see Million Hector Fire, NBC. It's it's highly possible. I mean, that was a five hundred thousand Hector fired in Alberta. But it's the million Hector fires, just not out of the question. So so that's where we start to get worried. That's where we start to get worried. You know, throughout the interior, where we have a lot of values on landscape, a ten thousand Hector fire's a bad fire. So a million Hector fires was no people. Yes, that weaken. We can deal with that. But even a ten thousand, fifteen thousand Hector fire a lot of values is a bad fire. When fires get hot enough, they actually start to create their own weather, making a dangerous situation even more unpredictable. As intense heat from the ground rises up carrying ash and smoke, they suck up what little water vapor is available and begin to develop like summertime cumulus clouds. The updrafts and downdrafts gets stronger until the tops of these pyro cumulus clouds are towering above thirty thousand feet. In rare cases, thes fire clouds can actually rain on themselves. More often, they create strong shifting winds and lightning that spark new fires and even fire natos. It is every bit as terrifying as it sounds, and large hot fires are already happening more often. So what do we dio? Bob Gray says. The answers, maybe, ironically, more fire by setting controlled burns fire ecologist can help areas from becoming tinderboxes that could turn a fire from a lightning strike into an inferno. We're at a point right now where we have a lot of carbon stored on the landscape, and that's the problem. And I mean standing here in the sight of interior. We're looking at a forest that historically probably had about thirty to fifty stems protector, and right now there's there's probably close to four thousand. So and historically it was just grass. It was grass and shrubs and herbs. And so if we want this to survive the next fire, the fire needs to be on the ground. So we have to remove all of this excess biomass. And we have to maintain this in that, you know, low density, tree density grass state through repeated, prescribed burning. And we need to do that over large areas. We get to high elevation, and that's where we need to basically break up the landscape. So that we have smaller fires in the future and not huge. You know, twenty, thirty, forty thousand Hector fires. So if we re plant species that are more fire tolerant than they're able to survive the next fire, if we go back and re plant species like lodgepole pine, they're not very fired taller and they'll be killed with next fire. And then they become a future fuel here in the Ponderosa pine for us, we need to get rid of Douglas fir and managed for ponderosa pine. In these Cooney's, it's managing for western large and ponderosa pine, the most to most fire toward species in the province. On the coast, where we're going to see some increased drawing and the odd years like twenty fourteen, it's it's managing for Douglas fir, and it's probably being more efficient at suppressing future fires and not letting those fires go. So it really comes down to managing for individual areas. It really is managing it because everything they're all complex, each place is gonna have to have its own specific sort of ecological direct standing in this spot right here. It's a It's a matter of removing all this bio Mass and it has no value. So it's a cost. It's a huge cost, and it's a cost to society to do it. But it's also what costs society to not do it. You know, smoke is a huge issue. We talk about doing a lot more prescribed burning and people don't want smoke. Thie issue, though, is How do you want your smoke? There is no no smoke option. If we were permitted to doom or prescribed burning, we can just, you know, puke a little bit of smoke in the spring and fall, and you know people can shut their windows and doors and maybe take off for the weekend or something. And we're good. We have to do a lot of that. But people are going to have to get used to smoke. And there just is no no smoke option. Of course, this poses a serious public health issue. There's a reason people don't like smoke. But in the year twenty fifty wildfire smoke is a constant hazard from the early spring through to the early fall. Now here's the thing. While fire is terrible for humans, both her health as well for our lively hoods fires aren't necessarily a bad thing for forests. In fact, fire plays an important role in forest ecology. Many tree species have adapted to emerge on Lee after a fire sweeps through an area, but climate change may even be changing. That fire is a is a natural process in most of our vegetated ecosystems. NBC. But standing here on the set of interior, I mean, this is really fire adapted ecosystem was historically, fire would come through on a regular basis, sometimes as frequently as every five to seven years. And so many species through evolution adapted to that fire regime. The funny thing standing here is if we had a fire, we came back the next spring, we would find a lot of species that we don't currently C here and they have seeds stored in the soil, and it takes heat to scare if I the seed and cause it to Germany. Species like seen office, which is a very important brows, species for deer and elk and somehow those wildlife species. No to go to burn areas because its succulent village plants after fire, and after that top kill, they put all their energy into growth. And no energy into protective enzymes and chemicals, so their foliage is highly palatable for wildlife. Species know that. So everything tends to be kind of focused in on fire. It's just amazing how it works. This pyro diversity. It causes diversity. Without it, we lose diversity. How has climate change shifted? That ecosystem has being in place for that natural cycle for centuries. Well, climate change has the has the potential to, um, really negatively affect that diversity. So we've already done damage by taking fire to the system. What he's saying is we prioritize putting out fires right away instead of sometimes just letting them burn naturally. Which means when fires do become out of control, there's a larger risk that will become more dangerous because of all that dry, dead fuel on the forest floor will keep it burning explosively. The next fire that comes through will likely produce more heat. The threshold of heat in the flux of heating the soil than those species you know adapted to overtime. So through that evolution, they were adapted to a certain level of heat, heat impact, and we're going to deliver heat that they're just not an aptitude so it'll be climate change resulting in a fire and then the fire, resulting in loss of diversity because it's a different kind of fire. So in places where we have a less frequent fire regime, we have a fire and the system has time to re balance itself. Resilience that it has a chance to sort of grow back and get comfortable with its surroundings and with climate change. We're going to truncate that and bring fire back too soon for the system to kind of adapt to it, and so we're gonna have a lot of losers in that one. Here's the thing. While people wildlife we can move, trees can't. They might live for centuries. And while that means trees have evolved to be hardy and adaptable, the rate of change is happening so fast that trees aren't able to adapt with it. Normally, when we think of fire season, you think of the hottest, driest days of the summer and fall. But by twenty fifty, the wildfire season starts early some years as early as April, some fires may smolder all year round. The snowpack simply isn't there to keep the forest ground moist enough to keep fires at bay. You remember Darwin Coxon from the ancient forest, that rain forest fuelled by snow rather than rain? Well, he says they haven't been able to find any evidence of fire in this thousand year old cedar stand. All thanks to snow. The landscapes around Prince George are dominated by force that typically burned every ninety one hundred years. I moved into a new law in the subdivisions, and when I dug a little pit in my garden. Being a biologist, I could see the little layers of charcoal. But when we come out to these small patches of ancient cedars east of Prince George, when you dig a pit in the soil, there's no charcoal layers or the charcoal heirs. When we date, thumb are like every two thousand years, you can find evidence of fires here you'll find Ah, big old cedar that has been hit by lightning and has burned up perhaps a tree or two around. It has been charged slowly, but then they fill a load, and what's happening is the springs in the CPJ areas. The melt of that snowpack creates a very moist, inhuman conditions in these ancient cedar stands, and it protects them against fires. When you come to the edge of this, these topographic positions you're suddenly back into force that air three or four hundred years old. So these air very special places in the landscape that are protected from fire by this linkage to the snowmelt. What do you think will happen Tio this forest by mid century? Were in a new area that has been newly placed into BC provincial park. It were standing in the ancient force. Chanda wanted a provincial park just designated in the summer of twenty sixteen. So if anywhere NBC, this force could survive into the future. It will be here. But a lot depends on what happens to these winter snow packs. We'll have some years, no doubt, have normal winters, but we're seeing more dry years more melt in the early spring. The records for the the coldest periods we had recently, in fact, are much warmer than cold periods. We had a decade or two ago, so it's a landscape that's changing in slow motion around us. You are not even that slow emotion. Snow's rule is important to forest ecosystems across the province. And even if there are years where we see a return to the high, dense snow packs that provide the moisture trees need climate change brings other threats to our forests. Like pests. Prince George is a community that knows firsthand the devastation pests can cause on forests. The mountain pine beetle affected eighteen million Hector's in BC, an area the size of Washington state it had a huge economic cost, destroying nearly sixty percent of pine trees that would have been logged. And forestry is still a major industry. NBC in twenty thirteen it had an economic output of more than thirty one billion dollars. And what we plant right now is what will be harvested in ninety to one hundred years. So it matters that we take a future climate into account. Che Elkin is the mix Would Ecology chair at the University of Northern British Columbia, which we should say is sponsored by the forestry company Slow can because his work has major implications for industry. We met him in a forested area near campus. When we look around us here, we see some beautiful spruce from Aspen, a little bit of older coming in, so really is a mixed would type of force. That is fairly indicative about the force that we see in Central, northern BC Here cheese work looks at climate models and then tries to figure out what that means for future forests and what forest management practices can do to adapt to those changes. That's the thing about force. You're dealing with things that don't move, that quickly. In general, migration is very, very slow, so that's the biggest challenge that we're actually facing With respect to climate change. We're looking at the climate changing much faster than the ecosystems can actually respond. So if you are talking about what the future what the force is going to look in two thousand fifty two thousand sixty, there were looking at climate change is going to greatly exceed the rate at which our force can respond. So what we're likely going to see is that, Yeah, there's going to be maybe not new species, but a different composition of the force that were then what we see here right now. In the long term, if we're looking to hundred years, yes, then we may see different species, but in the short term is gonna beam or a change in the mixture that we see around us. And also general prediction is that a gradual shift of the species that we see farther south up into Amore northern area. Many of these trees have been around for hundreds and even thousands of years. In this area, they're resilient to huge vary abilities. But even in the next thirty years, it seems to me looking at the climate projection projections with a warmer winters and less snow and more rain. Those air pretty extreme stressors. How will trees that are usually resilient is this is a big change for them. Yeah, so your one percent correct trees are long lived species they're designed. Evolution is designed them to withstand a lot of stress is. But when we get to areas where they really are pushing again and the boundaries of what their biology allows them do. That's where we may see fairly big shifts in what the actual force composition is. Drought is a big stress. This is something we've really come to realize more and more of the past twenty years that a couple of really severe drought years can have huge impacts, both on the growth as well as the mortality of many of the species trees that we see in our forest. So, yeah, they are very adaptable. They are designed Teo be able to survive in many different cares, but they do still have thresholds. And when those thresholds are exceeded, we may see really stretch our productions and growth. This is not good for if we want to use them for five of production, but also there's Sometimes we actually see really strong mortality events with those trees dying off a swell. Nearly two thirds of British Columbia is forested, and nearly one in seven jobs has a forestry connection. So when it comes to an industry that employees so many people in the province, what's the solution? Not putting? All of our eggs are logs in one basket, as in the forest themselves, there's a lot of leg these trees that we see around us right here. They started growing fifty years ago with much different climate. For the manager's his same thing they started managing. These forced fifty years go forty years ago, ten years ago, and there's a lot of weight for how our industries work. How are for sector develops. And while people are trying to recognize more and more that we probably will be dealing with a different environment in the future, there is a slow change taking place. But it is taking place. I don't think anyone these days would say that. We don't expect to some changes in the future. The magnitude, those changes in the type of impact that actually has on our force. That's really where the question is right now. And it's not just what industry harvests, but how it's harvested in twenty fifty. Warmer, wetter winters in places like Prince George means the harvest starts earlier, and that means loggers have to navigate the roads at night when it's cooler as they try to beat the mud. That makes those back roads impassable. Roads that used to to be reliable in twenty fifty our northern forests are at a tipping point. Trees planted in the twentieth century are getting weaker, worn down by drought and pest outbreaks. And as we mentioned, forest fires have been devastating in some parts. The province. The ongoing public forestry debate isn't over softwood lumber. It's over whether the forest industry should be able to grow on Crown land because climate change doesn't just affect thie economic value our forests. In a rapidly changing climate, trees provide some essential services. Shade provides cool areas and urban settings, as well as for fish swimming upstream in warming waters, dense networks of roots hold together soil and prevent erosion and wash odes during torrential rain. And, of course, trees capture carbon from the atmosphere. Back at the ancient Forest Trail, our producer, Polly and I asked Arlen Cox in how much carbon a force like this could capture. You have to be careful You don't generalize about force and carbon sinks over the whole landscape. A young, lodgepole pine force that Prince George is very different from a thousand year old ancient cedar stand. There's been some great work on carbon storage in the ancient cedar stands done by my colleagues that you, NBC and we know that these forest stands store as much carbon as stand and some of the very wet locations on the coast. The coastal temporal rainforest. Ah, no. Upwards of five hundred tons of carbon per Hector. Huge carbon stores in these old forest, the best strategy for reducing greenhouse gas emissions is, too leave these old force standing when you log these old force. That's five hundred tons of carbon per Hector that is largely released back to the atmosphere. The province has announced the plan, too. Make sure that all of our force our fully restored we're planning these treason sites that we planned to log every eighty or ninety years. So it's it's a short term storage of carbon that carbon. We will be released back to the atmosphere when we log those force in the future. It's like taking out a loan from the bank. You know you've got all this money in your pocket and you think you're ready, but you have to pay it back. So it's a good idea for the ecosystem. But it's probably not a strategy that will reduce our carbon emissions as a province in the long term. As our force change, so too, will the animals that use them. Many wildlife are already facing enormous stress, including habitat loss from human activity, whether it's expanding suburbs or hydro electric dams by twenty fifty, some species won't be able to adapt quickly enough, including the mountain caribou who depend on ecosystems like this snow forest for food during the winter of chocolate bars with trees. What does the caribou need in the wintertime? Doesn't need a lot of protein. It just needs energy. You know, if it's thirty below out, you're burning a lot of calories. It turns out these hair like he's using his ski pole to point out. A light green hair liken hanging a few meters up in the branches of a large cedar. It lives up to its name. It hangs down almost like a beard, dry out because of almost sugars that also protects them from freezing in the winter time. And that's why I carry will love them as a food source. They're like little chocolate bars hanging in the trees. Climate change means getting that like and fix will be that much harder for an already stressed and dwindling population. Heard in suitable grizzly Dan area here, it's probably about half the size it was twenty five years ago. Remember recent conversation that probably about ninety one hundred animals right now, but they'll be wandering through these mountain force at this time of year? This is what they're having for breakfast, lunch and supper. Years was record low snowpack could lead to greater mortality amongst the caribou. And, of course, these warmer winters with more rain events, more transitions back and forth between rain and snow mean the's lichens, which formally just sat there pretty. An act, if all winter long, you know, wet there. No metabolizing. The Lycans themselves are starving to death because it's not light enough in the winter for photosynthesis, So possible impact of warmer winters is the food source for the caribou. Uh, could also disappear because the winters are, too. This is an ecosystem that is adapted to cold, snowy winters. From the mountain caribou to the giant cedars. They need a deep snow pack to survive. Some animals, like grizzlies, will adapt by pushing further north. But for many species, heading for cooler temperatures means pushing through some of the most populated parts of the country. The Canada U. S border environment, just right, along with species and everything, does not recognize international boundaries that never has and never will. This is Byron Lewis. He's the chief of the Okanagan Indian band, and he's worked with multiple parliamentary committees, both with the FN and the National Aboriginal counsel. Currently, he sits on the Offense Advisory Committee on Climate Action and the Environment. He says the failure to properly deal with climate change will have direct impacts on wildlife and First nations In Extinguish, a ble writes, Well, you look around this valley right now. Do you see a place where species could actually move north and don't have a recognized the corridor to move north from? So what's going to happen? You know they're going to be blocked at a certain point. So if we're going to be looking at how we can actually again mitigate the effects of global warming, we have to ensure that there's adequate. The corridor's going yourself for this movement to species as a, you know, move into different habitat. What might that mean? As far as a cultural impact for, you know, people who have who have a history and a connection. Tio one kind of species and who, you know, grew up knowing the land through stories one way, how my climate change impact that in in a cultural sense, if you actually look at it from that perspective, you know all species would have some type of ah practice associated with them. When I first started in politics about nineteen ninety one always told at that time by our elders, Look after the animals and they, in turn will look after you and you know, being Ah, you know, I was in my early twenties that didn't really sort of sink in until I started witnessing this through my political career. But if you'll look at one hundred ninety, probably ninety eight ninety nine Supreme Court decisions that were won by First Nations, a majority of them started out with access. But now it's moving from access to two. Protection of this means that it's not just a legal question about whether provinces or the federal government are restricting first nations from accessing their inherent rights, such as traditional fishing grounds. But whether governments have done enough to make sure there's still fish there to catch it all. And that could lead to some landmark lawsuits. And this is significant when you look at that, and especially when you look at the Supreme Court decisions in Canada that said, in terms of extinguishment of rights, there's a question of even the federal government has the authority to extinguish a right. But definitely provinces do not have that jurisdiction. They may infringe, but they may not extinguish. Now, if you look at the majority of the practices, especially in resource development, that leads to decline and, ah, the extinction of a species, it's being conducted by provinces that do not have that authority. So in those you know, what's going to become ing in the next few years is eventually is going to be the social, economic you know movement where you're looking at qualifying in quantifying aboriginal rights, and that's going to be significant. You'd taken consideration, Sam, and there's a There's an actual net value to that. If you're in Aboriginal person and part of your tradition, is having access to that at meals and you start looking at that pounds per day for our people any times out by three hundred sixty five, then you times at by the retail value of salmon being eight ninety nine a pound. You're talking about some significant values. The same type of consideration can be given to other wild game or what's considered country foods. So when you start looking at the qualification and quantification, that's quite significant and those are going to be the next, you know what you're going to see on her ison is damages. He effects from there, and that's where the behinds potential comes from. The the mitigate will come from because it's suddenly no longer of so, Chief, where do you pick berries toe? Oh my God, how are we going to fix this mess? How are we going to fix this mess? The challenge of finding a solution to something as far reaching and is overwhelming as climate change can be daunting, especially just a CZ one person. But most of the scientists, researchers and thinkers we spoke with they were cautiously optimistic that I actually feel pretty hopeful about our ability to address climate change if the infrastructure is there to support those kinds of behaviours than I think people will take. And I think we have to come together and figure out what sort of planet do we want? I have five grandchildren, so I'm interested in the future that they will inherit. Vancouver is a leader in moving towards a low carbon economy. I believe that we can get out in front and make a difference. We are not necessarily doomed, not necessarily, but how well we fare in twenty, fifty and beyond depends on what we do today. On our next episode. Consequences and Solutions. I'm CBC meteorologist Johanna Wagstaff, and this is twenty fifty degrees of Change, a CBC Vancouver podcast exploring how our province will be transformed by climate change in the year twenty fifty. You can download this episode and all the others at cbc dot slash podcasts or on iTunes, and you could also leave us a rating or review if you enjoyed it. Form or CBC podcasts, go to cbc dot see a slash podcasts.