Thiss is a CBC podcast. This is Chili Gonzales. Please don't skip ahead. This advertisement is twenty three seconds from my new album. So little piano three. Enjoy. Solo piano three is available on all streaming platforms. Hey, listeners, Johanna Wagstaff Here, If you like twenty fifty degrees of change, you should check out the big one. Your survival guide from KPCC in California, host Jacob Margolis walks you through what a seven point eight magnitude earthquake would be like in Los Angeles. Show has this incredible fiction narrative mixed in with interviews with seismologists, emergency responders, earthquake survivors and economists. Every episode ends with practical tips for all of us who live in earthquake zones. Subscribed to the big One, your survival guide on Apple and Google podcasts or wherever you get twenty fifty degrees of change. Good morning area. It's time to wake up. It is November fourth, twenty fifty. The temperature in Vancouver is nineteen degrees. There is a rainfall warning. In effect, a Category five hurricane made landfall in Halifax this morning. The province has declared a state of emergency. The Red Cross will be mobilizing at your school this morning. For much of the story we've told you so far, life is pretty good for Ariadne E. Up until now, she's Bean happy. She's still well fed. There may be tighter water restrictions but still has fresh water. She can still ride her bike outside and play soccer, even though they're more frequent air quality warnings. Up until the middle of this century, we can be reasonably hopeful that life NBC will be quite different, but recognizable, at least to some degree. Vancouver has adapted to the change. But the reason we haven't seen seismic shifts in the way we live isn't just because of our politics policies or personal choices. Part of it is just because of our geographic location, the effects of a changing climate. NBC will mean things will be different. It will even be difficult. But unlike much of the rest of the world, many of us will be hit in a way that forces us to make life or death choices. This's twenty fifty degrees of change. I'm meteorologist Johanna Wagstaff, and in this episode, we're tracking the human consequences of climate change. In twenty fifty. Climate change has led to humanitarian disasters around the world. A major cyclone coupled with rising sea levels breached Shanghai's seawall and caused massive flooding. Two million people died in the aftermath. Seven million more were displaced. It will take years to fully rebuild. A three year drought in northern Brazil has withered crops, exacerbating food shortages for those most in need. Changing weather patterns have disrupted the monsoon cycle, causing longer droughts and more severe flooding, which is what millions at risk across Cambodia and Vietnam. In twenty forty five, Miami was devastated by a Category four hurricane. Thousands lost their lives. Hundreds of thousands of homes were destroyed and up to a million people were displaced. A heat wave in twenty forty killed fifteen thousand people in Dubai alone after temperatures soared to fifty five degrees for more one week. Massive annual flooding, magnified by sea level rise in Senegal has caused hundreds of thousands of people to head to the car. But the capital is struggling with years of severe flood damage in its own right. The Pacific island nation of the Marshall Islands has been abandoned. The Philippines have been hit with storm after catastrophic storm, the Great Barrier Reef is almost entirely bleached out. The Arctic has had summers without any sea ice. Almost every year since twenty thirty five, Europe has closed its borders to hundreds of thousands of climate refugees. Water shortages hinder the Mediterranean's agricultural sector. Political tensions are running high. Climate change has caused severe storm damage, destroyed homes and coastlines, spread disease. Famine caused economic and political unrest. Even armed conflict around the world displacing millions. This is what the rest of the world is facing in just three decades. And if this sounds far fetched, international organizations like the U. N the W h o the World Bank, they're projecting such calamities. Quinn Dire is an author and journalist. He's the author of the book Climate Wars, which forecast the human consequences of a warming world for most of his career. He's written about war and conflict. But he says climate change is what scares in the most well. Migration is going to be the issue. Will we be getting migration out of the states? Probably, yes, the Southern states both the south West and the South East, Um, are really in the sub tropics. You know, on the sub tropics, you're going to get hammered by this stuff. It gets hotter and drier in the Southwest, it gets hotter and the storms get bigger in the Southeast, and probably drought in the Southeast as well as yourself. West by twenty fifty thie, Americans are losing it whole areas to either flooding like Southern Florida. Little rise in sea level sees off me. At Miami, there's a few million people having to move, and the crops are withering, you know, in the heat, and you are beginning to see Americans moving north in very large numbers, mostly people with money. Frankly, who could afford they're not. They're not refugees. They're just coming to buy stuff up the broader picture going to Europe, going to Asia, Africa, Latin America is very grim and its grimmer the closer you get to the equator and again, the key issues food, the drought's are hitting food production in the south tropics. Well, you know, between the tropics and the sub tropics, you've got seventy percent of the global population, and they are going to be on the move. Not all of them, obviously, but a lot of them, because there simply isn't enough food and people will not stay, sit there and watch their children starve. They will move, no matter how difficult you make it. So the borders will have slammed shut to keep deluges of refugees from the tropics and the sum tropics from coming in to the temperate zone countries. That's still a least. You're growing enough to feed themselves because they can't feed the world. And if the world comes inside, you know, then there's not enough to go around for anybody. So borders your SATs slamming shut. And the dirty little secret about borders is if you want to shut the border, you can all you have to be willing to do is kill people. Gwynn does not paint a hopeful picture of the near future by mid century in Canada, we've worked hard to cut our carbon emissions in half, but even then, it's not enough to keep our lives from changing. And this is in a country with abundant fresh water, lots of room and a rich economy. We've escaped the worst of the droughts and heat waves that have killed so many around the world. Well, we've experienced horrible floods, terrible forest fires. We haven't had the kind of loss of human life or forced relocation that other regions have had compared to the rest of the world. BC is a relative climate oasis. Well, you think about Canada. Anything about British Columbia? Where would you like Tio? You remember Stephen Shepherd from UBC? Steven wrote the book visualizing climate change and created the videogame Future Delta. A teaching tool for imagining what Delta will look like in different climate scenarios. We got space, We got water, We got resources, We got energy. We've got you know the thing. Democracy, Um, seems pretty attractive to me. We did a study. If he is back with Delta, one of a sort of local visioning studies on climate change. And one of the things that we explored was where my refugees go is particularly if they come in in large numbers or their major events, like major flooding events elsewhere. I mean, we have strong connections with this, like India and Pakistan and many of many parts of the world. So they may well, you know, wish to come here. And if the government allows him to come in, then where would they go? And so we explored the possibility of a large sort of unplanned temporary settlements, often in sort of more marginal areas that have made themselves be a flood prone and this kind of thing. So where would those communities go? And what would I have it on neighborhoods look like? So I think that's an important question for anybody who's thinking about how do we address climate change? That we mitigated is how many of these kind of refugees settlements do you want? It's like the same question. How much sea level rise do you want? How much food prices? How high do you want them to go? Because the longer we wait to mitigate these things you know locally and globally, then you know the worst it's going to get. Everything works by twenty fifty. A steady river of people looking for a better, more stable environment have arrived in Canada. Metro Vancouver has seen its annual immigration rates more than double to one hundred and fifty thousand people arriving every year. Some will be climate refugees fleeing cataclysmic disasters. Others will be economic migrants, seeking opportunities that climate change has destroyed elsewhere. What are we planning for it? But we will do something. We will do various things, and whether we do enough is an open question. And when I am not tremendously optimistic about, but I can believe it could happen. I mean, one of the things that you can't calculate is how much will the really nasty local stuff that starts toe happen in the twenties and thirties of this century as the climate goes well, about one degree higher average global temperature? How much will that motivate people to take this all more seriously? It's a political and a psychological question. You cannot answer in advance. No, they made his counter closed her eyes to it. Don't want to think about it. But, you know, a rational, severely rational human race, not one we've ever had to deal with. I could solve this problem very easily. We've never even come close to two degrees, you know? I mean, all you need is people who actually put the long term outcome as their take it as their primary go, you know, avoid a disaster in a period passed my likely lifetime, and it's very hard to get people to focus on that. You know, we talk a great deal about, you know, sacrificing for the next generation. It's nonsense. We don't. If we don't it'll we load them down with debt and we leave them with all sorts of problems that we didn't bother to fix because it wasn't hurting. Yet. James Hansen has been telling people that it's already hurting for decades. In fact, he's known around the world as the father of climate change awareness. He goes by Jim. He wears a three piece suit and an Indiana Jones hat. He's a Columbia University professor and climate scientists who ran at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies for more than three decades. Back in nineteen eighty eight, he made headlines when he testified in front of the United States Senate committee that global warming was riel and that it was caused by human activity. His testimony made global warming part of the public conversation, and he hasn't stopped raising the alarm ever since. Well, I'm most concerned about those things that are irreversible. One of those is ice sheet disintegration and sea level rise. If I sheets begin to disintegrate and reach a point where they're out of our control out of young people's control, then we will get sea level rise of several meters. The last time the planet was a degree warmer than now, sea level reached heights of six to eight meters higher than today, which would mean all coastal cities become dysfunctional. The economic consequences of that and the fact that hundreds of millions of people would become refugees would make the planet practically ungovernable. So that's what that's one irreversible effect that we have to avoid. The other thing is just the other species on the planet, where there's the potential for driving a significant fraction a quarter to a half of the species to extinction. If we follow business as usual, What he says business as usual. He's talking about a scenario where collectively, globally, we don't cut back our carbon emissions. This is also the worst case scenario. Despite working on climate change for more than four decades and seeing how little things have changed, Jim's still optimistic. You may be discouraged by the fact that we've been arguing that we need action for, you know, a few decades now. However, the optimistic side of the story is that if we I do begin to take actions by putting a simple rising carbon fee, this could work quite rapidly. The economic studies show that if you had a ten dollars a ton tax that went up ten dollars it on each year by the other ten years, it reduce emissions thirty percent, and it would increase the GNP, the gross national product, and increased the number of jobs. So there's really no reason not to do it, except that the fossil fuel industry is so powerful in our capitals. But if young people would take the control of the situation, which sounds like a huge assumption, but it could be done. You know, we still have Democratic governments, even though special interest seemed to control our capitals. It's actually possible to affect the democratic system, and I'm hopeful that that will happen within the next several years. Jim Hansen is putting his hope and a global carbon tax, one that will become so expensive. No country will be burning fossil fuels, and there are lots of people working on possible solutions. Thank of Elon Musk, who's revolutionizing the way we think about energy or individual nations like tiny Costa Rica, hoping to reach its goal of being the first carbon neutral country in the world in just a few short years. China, once vilified for its carbon emissions, is now becoming a global leader. Individual provinces like Ontario moving away from coal fired power plants before any federal law told them to. In many ways, this is going to come down to innovation, political byeon and dollars and cents. Already more money is being invested in renewables than ever before. Around the world. In twenty fifteen, more than twice as much money was spent on renewables than on coal and gas fired power generation there's a lot of good work being done out there. Some of the solutions are things we may not have even heard of yet. Technology may not be the cure, but with a rate technology's advancing, it will be part of the solution. But what can one person D'oh you've heard the stock response trade in your car for a transit pass? Make your home more energy efficient. Buy second hand, Eat less meat. Yes, we're telling you to become a Vancouver hipster, but it's thes kinds of small changes that eventually lead to larger shifts, sometimes in a few short years, other times over generations. For decades, one family has been trying to bridge that generational gap. So we asked two generations of Suzuki's to join us. Thiss is the nature of things. David Suzuki has Bean, a Canadian environmental icon for more than four decades, a scientists, educator and, of course, the longtime host of the nature of things. His daughter, Severin Colas. Suzuki is an environmentalist in her own right. It's very, very discouraging as an elder. Now I know the history of it, and you have to remember in nineteen eighty eight that was the absolute peak. Brian Mulroney was reelected. He appointed Lucien Bouchard is ministered, and this is he was the hottest politician in government at that time. So I interviewed Bush are three months later I said, Mr Bush, are What do you think is the most important environmental issue? Is nineteen eighty eight, he said, Global warming. So the wound. That's pretty good, I said, How serious is it? And his answer was it threatens the survival of our species. We have to act that's nineteen eighty eight. The urgency was there. The scientific community in the eighty eight called for a twenty percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and fifteen years. That was it. And we didn't do it. You know, we didn't take it seriously. What do you think happened? Well, we went into a small recession, and then the climate deniers began to be fed tens of millions of dollars to say it's junk science. This is a natural cycle. It's a sun spots and all of this other phony baloney stuff. And so they succeeded in In getting the public to think. Oh, yeah, well, they haven't settled the sciences in them. Seven. You've also spent your whole life fighting for environmentalism, and you have two young children who will be adults in the middle of the century. Are you optimistic about their future? Well, my kids, you know, are very privileged, so they're probably, you know, still going to be alive and active and engaged. And I think for them, you know, in the context of the globe, they have a pretty good chance. It's still having, you know, a pretty positive lifestyle. But I think for most of the world, by that time, we'll be in major conflict, and climate will be. The issue will be the backdrop for everybody's life. There won't be the luxury of this conversation whether or not it's happening or what kind of emissions we will be fully engaged in. Water, crazies, refugee crises, civil war, the kinds of things that we're seeing right now. But we're not connecting to climate yet. I mean, my attitude really is, you know, shifting from kind of mourning. The loss is we are entering fully into the sixth Mass extinction and really engaged in Well, you know, we've got to be engaged in a conflict. We've gotta do what we can. The unusual thing about right now is that it's globalized and that we have actually shifted the atmosphere for life on the planet. David. I feel like most of your sort of battles were getting people to even acknowledge climate change in making it part of their conversation. And Severin sort of for our generation. It's making people act to stop catastrophic climate change. What will be the rule of the next generation in this ongoing battle? I think we have to build the vision of what we need, what we want, and it's going to be about governance. It's going to be all about alternative economics is going to be about community energy, sovereignty, totally new structures for human organizing. It totally is coming to pass that everything is just slowly crumbling because it's so unstable, because the values underpinning it all are not human values. The thing I worry about, you know, their this the cartoon, the road runner, and I guess it was a wily coyote that would chase the road runner and he'd run over the cliff. Right needs suspend it. They're going, Oh, I think And then down he goes, and this is the big worry is overshoot that by the time we say Oh my God, we've we need a gigantic program. We will have so eroded the basic biology of the planet that it'll be beyond turning back for the vast majority of environmentalists. They think if we get more energy efficient and transfer to green energy and buy electric cars that will be able to lift the way we're living now, we won't be able to do that. This is a fundamental signal. There were far beyond the capacity of the planet to absorb what we're doing. We've got to be living much more simply and much more locally. We have to approach this as a legacy opportunity that they're living generations, that they have to be on the side of the positive story. And that is the narrative that I'm giving my kids. You know, my son yesterday asked me, Mom, will there be Comodo dragons when I'm grown up and I, you know, said, Well, probably, but you know, probably not. I am, you know, I was seeing and dad, that maybe I should have said, Forget about charismatic megafauna. We have to worry about the keystone species, the eel grass thie you know the Sam and these things that keep us all I'll going. But, you know, the top level predators that are endangered right now, Um, you know, sorry. Those are gone. I chose not to tell my seven year old that but in the future, you know, the narrative I'm saying is we're warriors. This is our time. This is the battle we're in right now, and we're on the side of worst on the side of sustainability were on the side of the future. This is what we're doing, son. This is our cause. And I think that having a cause is in a bad thing to have in the twenty first century. You know, we're very privileged to be able, Tio, have a voice, Tio have a choice on how we live our lives and to be taking responsibility taking responsibility looks different for everyone. The difficulties will see by twenty fifty pale in comparison to what could happen by the end of the century. If we do nothing in the models, twenty fifty is, after all, a tipping point. It's after that all the scenarios show an increase in accumulative effects of climate change. How steep? How severe those variations are depends on what we do now. And there are lots of people who are dedicating their careers to this. We spoke with more than forty people for this podcast scientists, farmers, policymakers and ecologist and all of them suggested even more people. We should talk Tio because the effects of climate change are so broad that it will impact every aspect of our lives. We've painted you a picture of how our world might look in twenty fifty, and we used a carbon emission scenario that requires us to make rapid progress in cutting our emissions and finding ways to capture carbon from the atmosphere. But the stark truth of it is that even if we cut emissions by fifty percent of what they are in the present day, that's still not enough to keep global temperatures from warming two degrees by the end of the century. And after that, the consequences of climate change become much, much worse for all of us. It won't play out like a disaster movie but it will transform the world we live in The big picture can feel too big to take in But there is still time to slow the worst impacts for many people we spoke with They say That's one of the best things You, Khun Dio, make it an issue you care about including Simon Donner, the climatologist from UBC We met back in Episode one. You know the message I think everyone who hears this podcaster Any story about climate change is to realize that you're a part of the solution, right? They were all part of this. The government can't do it alone cos can't do it alone. A bunch of environmentalists can't do this on the one. We're all part of solution regardless of what you do for a living and what you knew in your spare time. We the world needs somebody with your expertise, right? It doesn't matter. You could be a lawyer, You could be a doctor, You could be a plumber. It really doesn't matter because we have to sort of re make the way we live a little bit. And so everybody has a way in which they can contribute to that probably the most effective one. To be completely frank from a just a strict numbers basis is to vote because if you think about the difference between what one direction election goes versus another could have on policies in the directions you know the country the province of the city takes to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Your vote could be the pivotal one that flips between the two, and we've actually done analysis of this, and it shows it's probably the most effective thing you can do in twenty fifty. British Columbia will still be here, and maybe you still will be two. Or maybe your children or grandchildren will be. It's easy to feel like giving up in the face of the challenges ahead. After all, what can just one person d'oh? But you need to decide if you're going to do the best you can to build a future that we all want to be part of I'm Johanna Wagstaff at CBC Vancouver, twenty fifty Degrees of change was produced by Myself, Poly Leisure and Cheryl Tobin. Sound Design by Lee Rose Fair special thanks to Ariadne E. Weber, Madison for her for Trail of Ariadne e in twenty fifty and our producer Polly as the Voice of Eva. You can download this episode and all the others at cbc dot slash podcasts or on iTunes. If you enjoyed this podcast, we would love it if you would raid it or leave us a review. Special thanks to Trevor Murdock at the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, the Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions and everyone we spoke with while researching this project and thank you for listening. For more CBC podcasts, go to cbc dot see a slash podcasts.