This is a CBC podcast. Hi, I'm Jamie. Puts on For the last decade, I've been a newspaper reporter, and lately I'm just finding it hard to keep up with the news. As of today, simple possession of marijuana is no longer illegal. It can be hard to make sense of things. Investigators spent nine hours in the consulate's appearance or murder. I want to change that. At least a little. I hope you'll join me for front burner at daily podcast from CBC News. Subscribe now wherever you get your podcasts. The craziest place for an ad. This is Albert. At noon. I'm Judy Elvis. Thirty years in the ad world in Terry O'Reilly has seen some pretty strange sights in Japan, For example, you can place ads on people's armpits to students, wiped out their student debt by renting their faces to advertisers. And an S and M store placed ads on the bottom of ketchup bottles. So when you spend the bottles oh, I think you get it. You can hear more stories in just a minute, because Terry O'Reilly is our guest for the whole hour. So call in to tell us what you've seen. The most unusual location for a ad. Just about seven minutes after twelve. Welcome to the show. He had a great weekends. Maybe even I got caught up on some sleep. Daylight saving Well, Terry, of course, is the host of Under the Influence. It airs weekly on CBC radio. This show is an exploration of advertising in the twenty first century, and it has twenty fifth five million podcast downloads and counting. Now one of the first episodes of the upcoming twenty nineteen season is all about wacky ad placements, so that's we're going to focus on today. So if you have a baby that triggers a story for you and add, you've seen an unusual location while I want you to give us a call now and you can share it with Terry. One, eight, six, six, four, six, eight, four, four, two, two I'll give that phone number again. That's number You call if you want to be on the radio with us. One, eight, six, six, four, six, eight, four, four to to send your tweets and tweets are great place because you can also maybe send us a little a little example of what you're talking about. That with the picture. Ah, they go two at Albert at noon and emails to Alberta at noon at cbc dot And once again, Terry O'Reilly in a Toronto studio with us for the hour. Hello. Hello, Judy. How are you? Are really, really great. I'm so happy we're able to join us. Well, thanks for having me. I got a ton of fans I would hear are getting emails from people saying, Terry O'Reilly. No way. Lovely. So tell us about more about the examples that you we tease the audience with off the top of the show. Well, you know, the Japan example that she heard me talk about briefly. That was really the thing that got me started on chasing down this particular episode. Because so what's happening in Japan is, as you may know, in subways there, very crowded. They even hire people to push you and into a subway. So everybody gets on. That's how crowded the subways are. So a lot of people have to hold those those railings in the subway exposing their armpits. So some entrepreneurial company saw an opportunity, Judy and started renting out people's armpits to put advertising. Oh, my. And I thought that was so crazy an idea that I thought, I wonder what else is out there. And that's why I decided, as I said, to explore that in an upcoming episode, I wonder what goes into the right armpit? Well, it's funny you say that because I also read that that company is holding auditions to find wonderful armpits, so they have some criteria. Oh, that's funny. All right, now, what about the buying of the face? A slate for advertising? Yeah, apparently, there's two students in the US They had amassed about eighty thousand dollars in student school debt, so they decided to start a company where they rented their faces. And it was by my face dot com, where they would put logo's or whatever on their faces and then go into certain events and, of course, attract a lot of publicity and attention. And it was in one or two years they had wiped out that entire debt. I've also seen the pictures online of sort of other. Like, I guess, body parts for rent hanging from someone's beard, beard advertising. Always gotta name Beard thing. Okay, so with the way this one works is you, they actually have little tiny clips and clip a little hanging ad from your beard. And then you walk around the whole day with this thing swimming off your beard as you are. You are. You hope that people wanted to stop and see what? That food in your beard. Oh, no, wait. It's an AB that's exactly right. Because it's so unusual. It gets a lot of attention. And what does all all advertisers want most of all is attention. All right. Okay, Listeners, you recognize the voice? This is your chance to call in and talk with Terry O'Reilly's our guest for the hour. He, of course, host of the very popular podcast and CBC radio show under the influence. And we are talking about the strangest places you have ever seen. A GN ad. And also, you know, I know a lot of these stories might involve locations for ads that actually backfire. So we're interested in those stories. Two, one eight six six four six eight for for two two is how you reach us. That's a toll free line. Give it again. One eight, six, six four six, eight for four to two. You want to wait? You also teased us about this. This spank the ketchup. Tell us more about that one. So an s and M fetish clothing company wanted to do some marketing. And they have, you know, very limited places where they can place ads. But they came up with this. Very, I think, funny idea where they put stickers for their stores on the bottom of ketchup bottles in restaurants, when people turn the bottles over to, you know, to spank the bottom of the bottle to get the ketchup to run out. They, of course, were spanking. That s and M logo. Which is just such a funny idea to me, it is. But with that work, for like, all the other factors at play, like the ketchup company, would they want that? Well, I think once they've sold, their product is probably the restaurant's choice. OK, they want to allow that. And they breast or maybe probably made some money off that. Yeah, Okay. All right. I want to read a quick email that came in. Ah, someone says love under the influence and the age of persuasion. Of course, that was the right. The precursor to under the influence has Terry seen or heard of the herbicide ads on grain bins on the prairies. I have not. Alright, interesting. All right. Well, that came from Rick. Rick, if you if you I want to send us some more details like that, we'd love to hear if I would. Yeah. Okay. Albert, at noon at CBC Dossier. Make about the phone number One more time, and then we'll go to a call. One, eight, six, six, four, six, eight, four, four to two. All right, Julian is on the line now from Edmonton. Julian. Hello. Well, a very good afternoon. A big fan of the podcast, Terry and, of course, Albert at noon. So I was on a holiday with my wife in Europe and, you know, kind of low budget We've wanted to visit Monaco, hopped on a parked car rental car, hopped on a city bus. Then we noticed that the adds up in the bus here in Canada. I'm used to seeing, like, upgrade your education. You know, those kind of those kind of ads and buses it was for you. Got insurance, Monica. Only in Monaco. That's way. Had a good laugh about that one. There were the average person might actually own a yacht. Exactly. Well, you know what? Yeah, that reminds me of I was once approached by a group of nuns to do some advertising for them, which I had never in all my years got a call from from nuns before. But they said, we have this problem that we we've lost our branding. They said, You know, we don't wear our habits anymore, so people don't think we exist anymore. So women who might have a spiritually calling don't know what to do with that. So we need you to get our name out there. So what we did Wass. We created an ad for buses, Justus Julian saying, And it said on it, If you're looking for answers, you're looking in the right direction. Except we put it on the ceiling or no axe had ever been put before, so and they had the lens logo, etcetera. So there's a lot of opportunities in transit. Believe it or not, I'm Yeah, I wouldn't have known that a nun's hada brand, but I guess I know I know, very savvy and very smart. We had a meeting and they were very, very you know, educated on what it took to get a brand out like they were. They said, we're fans of your show. We listen all the time. We make notes, and there you go. I'm wondering, Terry, like what would drive? And I'm thinking on sort of some of the more outrageous idea is that you, You know, the armpits or the hanging from the beard, the beard advertising? It's also bald ver ties ing, right? Yes, just close to my heart. Judy, by the way. So same thing where you can put a logo on someone's bald head. And again, it's just the novelty of it that gets attention. But what look would drive an agency to put an ad in such an unusual location? Well, that's a good question. And here's the reason there's so much advertising clutter in the world out there now. I mean, the rule of thumb is that we all see between thirty five and six thousand commercial messages a day. And if I say to you, Judy, what ads do you remember from yesterday and my struggle with that and that Think about how much wasted money there is. So advertisers are constantly looking for ways to break through the clutter. So one of those ways is to show up on a bald head or in a beard or on someone's armpit because it's so unusual. It's not in traditional media that it gets attention and ah, and you know that it breaks through the clutter. The downside, of course, is that it adds more advertising to the world where every square inch has got an ad or some message on it. That's the downside. I thought. You're going to say the downside is that your ad might be in somebody's armpit on a subway in Japan like, Isn't. Isn't there a risk about where you might want, even even if it grabs attention, that it might give the wrong message about bringing in? I think I think a brand would have to pick and choose what works with them. Like, for example, if it was some kind of, you know, toilet product, like a bathroom product, that might be a smart place to advertise. You know, if it was toothpaste or shaving cream or whatever. Yeah, or razors. Razors? Okay, All right, all right. The number to call one, eight, six, six four six, eight four, four two to the most unusual ad you have seen. Give us a call. You could talk to Terry, see if he has seen what you've seen. One, eight, six six four, six eight for four, two two. Robert has tweeted in a big fan of Under the influence, he writes. A big rock brewery will stack large, round bales of hay and then wrap them like a beer can. Well, that's funny. Yeah, Placement is along. Roadways. I've not seen that have. Have you ever heard of this one? Mandatory? But, well, something that similar that we talk about in this episode is in England. There's a lot of train travel, and there's a place called train line dot com that promises to save people up to forty percent off their train tickets. So what they did, because you're passing lots of meadows and fields on the train. They put ponchos on sheep that said, forty three percent. Also, as you're going by all these herds of chef sheep, you're saying all these cheap wearing these ponchos? That's advertising that claim There they will plot Jos. I don't know. I don't know. The sheep would appreciate the irony and half what they Well, you know, this whole this whole area we're talking about today is called ambient advertising, meaning that in our in my industry, it's ambient meeting. It's it's it's in the It's out in the In the environment, it's not on traditional media, and that would probably qualify his Lamby in advertising. Oh, my goodness. Did you use that one in your podcast? Did I? Of course. I like credit for that later. Good. Good line like that should never go to waste. Okay, here's someone has actually tweeted us in Terry. A picture of those big rock bales of hay, fantastic traditional and grass hopper giant bales of hay wrapped like beer cans. That was from Carrie Ann, who tweeted and speaking of ads on the prairie, my co worker from Ontario made me stop during a road trip to take a pic of the beer can Hay bales. That's because those hay bales were out there anyway. They're probably the right shape. So tell us what would like if you're in the ad world like What is that? What's the tone that you would want to be striking when you do one of these ambient ads. Well, I think the placement itself is probably pretty bold, and I'm a big fan of bold advertising. If you listen to my show at all, I'm always trying to convince advertisers not to do safe, boring advertising. So where it shows up is bold. And then the message itself could be, actually, you know, pretty straight ahead, as long as the where it shows up is outrageous, right? Is, it's almost in the in ambient advertising. It's where it is almost more than what it iss interesting. All right, Brad in Banff. Hello. Welcome to the show es Brad and bat for you. With us. Yeah. Yeah. You're with us here in Albert at noon. Tell us about unusual location for an ad that you've seen. Well, speaking of things carved into the side of things, always remember the green drop carved into the green hill of the side on the trip back and forth the bank. But I was in tracking in the Paul one time about fifteen years ago, before we were carving things on the side of our hair here. And a tracking company had their logo actually basically emblazoned along with the name and the phone number of wealthy tracking number into the side of a yak hair. Yeah, because we're in the Mount Everest. Anyway, that's that's some story. Awesome. Do you? Yeah. Advertising. No. Nice. He just comes. Now we know why you were drawn to this field, Gary. Do you remember? It was just the one yak. And do you remember like, the chatter around it that you would have heard? Well, we first we thought it was some sort of brand, and then I guess it is a brand. But we realized that No, it's actually so the logo's you'd see them on. Those particularly act. So looks like only one person was on to that idea. But yeah, you definitely going back and forth up and down the trail. That's great. Wow. The actor tiling the actress. Amazing. Yeah. Alright, Brad. Thanks for that. Yeah, thank you. Alright, let's goto left bridge now. Adam, in left bridge with us now. Adam. Hello. Hi there. Hey, what's the unusual location for an ad that you wanted to tell us about? Well, this this ad is maybe more traditional, but it kind of had a twist to it. So this was about twenty years ago near the airport in Kelowna. And there is a billboard on the side of the road and the top of the billboard looked like it had been damaged, almost as if something had clicked it to run into it. And I was originally more interested in looking at the damage to the billboard. And then I realized that it was advertisement for the Yellow Pages, and the phone book had been turns to flying lessons on the billboard. So funny. So there's something that stuck with me for twenty years, and they really had a chance to share in this story. So I thought, This is a great time, All right. And look how you remembered that twenty years later, I mean, that's that's the what the ultimate goal is An advertising is to create something that has such impact. That you remember it. Not just in the moment, but for a long time past that. So there we are. It's been stuck in my head for that long. I love telling that story when I get a chance. All right, Adam. Glad you shared with us today. Thank you very much. You know, Terry were talking a little bit earlier about with that. Sometimes these unusual locations can can backfire to someone has tweeted in a photo. It's from Israel, and its sort of the advertisement is for a water company, and the ad reads, Drink eight glasses every day, but it's over top under the under the ad, and top of it are bottles of alcohol, right? So instead of storing water in the cooler, they're storing booze. So, yes, times when unusual placement for ad doesn't necessarily work like how how often do you look at these ads in these sort of unusual locations and think well that that what they didn't think through that one carefully? Sometimes I would say more than often more than not, it's it's actually working. Sometimes you can't always decide or you can. You have no control over What you know is beside you when you're out there in the in the world putting up anatomy in unusual places, you suggested, like there could be something right beside you that makes your ad ridiculous or or just completely obliterates it. But on the whole, I have to say most of them are either just dull or they really work. Yeah, well, how about how about this one? In the men's room, someone has tweeted in in a urinal. I saw an advertisement on the plastic shield for the urinal cake reminding us to get our prostate checked. It fifty plus. Well, you know, urinals are our big source of ad ideas. So I once saw there was a little soccer net, a miniature soccernet in the urinal. The green pad looked like grass, and there was a tiny little marble shaped ball so you could push the ball around with your stream if I may. And there was a sign above the urinal that said, you know, soccer's fund anywhere. But it's more fun on ESPN. So there you go. Like it was just I mean, you've got a lot of attention. Tell me you've been inside an agency how people come up with this eye. These ideas, Well, you know what? It is about creativity. It's about a creative team and art director in a writer being given a brief saying, Get us attention for this thing at this time. Whatever. Then they sit down and just and just blue sky it and just play. What if games and someone mentioned to me to speaking of urinals that they were in a urinal And and when that the puck in the urinal changed colors over his time there. And actually, I guess it was heat activated. And what came up on the on the urinal puck was to vote for a certain person during an election. Oh, the politician had bought the pucks. Wow. Is that Is that it? Is that a good campaign? And you did it? Well, I don't know what I don't know. Sometimes you know, some attention. Maybe is not the best intentions. Exactly. Alright, John. Now on the phone from Edmonton. Hello, John. Oh, great. John. Yeah. What's the story you wanted to share with the with us and Terry Riley? Well, first of all, I want to thank you, Mr Elijah, to his program whenever I have the chance. And what a fascinating insight into the civilization we have built. Thanks, John. My story will be a brief one. There was a business in Abington. I don't know if they still operate. Called the light. Oh, Chinese restaurant. And they had a jingle that went if you're hungry. Call the lie idle for two, six, five. Oh, five. Oh. One day I was picked up on a routine check by the police and thrown into the hoosegow for unpaid parking tickets that I forgot the boat. And I said, Well, do I get a phone call? Just joking. They said. Sure, I went over to the telephone that they used to call their lawyer. And it said next to the phone and bold numbers for help. Call for two, six, five o five o Hold on. Let them know they were on the wall of the police station there. Wow, That's so funny that I just even stuck in the brains of the police officers. It I'm sure I don't know if they want it. There's a joker directors out there, but we all got a good laugh about it. That's funny. I imagine that there are people all over Edmondson right now singing that jingle back in the days when you didn't have the the fourth of the seven. Eight o at the beginning of it. Right. I know it's an earworm is saying, I'm sure. All right, John. Thanks so much for that. All right. Or if you're listening into the show today and this is just making you think of ads that you know, a lot of these are stories that people have remembered so many years later. Do give us a call. One eight, six, six, four, six, eight four, four, two, two. Someone has sent us a tweet, Terry. That said I loved it when the horse at the Kentucky Derby was named Audible after the online audio. I didn't hear that. I didn't hear that either. And that's great. But it is interesting. Okay, fill with us. Improve in a spruce grove now. Hello, Phil. Hello. Hi. So you've been involved in the industry, have you? No. Okay, well, not not professionally. Certainly. My I don't remember what? The advertisements, Actually, we're just the location. And it was on the rungs of the ladder that was being carried through the Edmonton City Marathon, which attracted quite a bit of attention and raised a lot of money for some charities, such as the Salvation Army and things like that. Hot And what? What were they doing with the ladder? Well, we carried it. We took turns. We had a handle on each end. And we we ran the marathon carrying the ladder. You ran the whole marathon carrying the ladder? Yes. Wow. Wow. It did attract attention, and it raised a lot of money. Ah, local media person, please. What's behind it. And he did it a number of times. And one time instead of a ladder, we pushed an oil derrick. And my concern was that it was under the electrical wires. I was game for it. Wow. So it was just a place where it attracted attention and certainly carrying allowed through a marathon. And we had a team of about ten people, and I but way took turns, but carrying a lot of really, really tried off. Did you survive the marathon uninjured? Yes, it did. There you go. All right, Phil. Thanks for that. You're welcome. So there you go, Terry. Someone who actually was involved with putting ads in an unusual place. Yeah, while the latter in a marathon. That is unbelievable. Let me have read an e mail that came in from Sylvia. She writes Said Dear Terry and Judy love your program. That's think that one goes out for you today. So many years. Ago, when we were living in the New Territories in Hong Kong, there was a competition for the best advertisement for Toblerone chocolate. So I thought a lot about it and decided that I would get a huge bar of Toblerone fix it between the horns off one of the local cows grazing near our house. I were the milkmaid stress sat on the little wooden stool with my pail and milked the cow with giant toblerone bar of chocolate clearly visible between the cows horns. We have the lovely photo. And after that effort, I sadly did not win the competition. But it was a lot of fun. And then see, like speaking to your point of the fact that this all these years later there we are saying the name of the chocolate company on the radio, right? Exactly right. That's what's all about. If you ever wondered if it worked. Yeah, all right. How about another one? Remembering jingles, someone says two. All beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions on a sesame bun. Yes, that will be stuck without Get the phone number of the Lido and admitting out of people some people's minds Another email. I love true Crime podcast and was recently listening to an episode about a serial killer who worked for Home Security Company. The ad during the episode was for that specific home security company. Wow. Does that count is up a zoo? That's just weird placement. That's not a crazy at It's a crazy media buy. Wow! Only they knew that was happening. Or was that just some kind of weird coincidence? I don't Yeah, it does seem odd, huh? Does because the alarm company would have to know that episodes coming up or somebody would have had to contact them. That's very strange, but if that counts as a miss in your in your world with odd, it's memorable. Yes, it's for sure. Yeah, alright, Terry O'Reilly is our guest for the hour on the show. He, of course, is the host of Under thie influence can hear the show, CBC, radio Thursdays and Saturdays at eleven thirty a. M. And of course, if you're probably one of the many, many people who also subscribes to his podcast and Terry will stay with us into the next half hour of the program will continue to take your stories. About those ads that you're still remember all these years later. Most unusual place for an ad. I'll give out the phone number again and you can call us now. Get under control on city streets and Edmonton. As a result, faras weather is concerned in Calgary today a manly, cloudy skies, thirty percent chance of flurries high of minus four currently sitting at minus five and in admitted a similar story, although a little bit cooler. Cloudy. A thirty percent chance of flurries and a high of minus seven currently sitting at minus ten. So there you go. Nice to be back to Chile One. Alright, Don. So great to have you back. You're helping Keep me warm. They always there The perfect things. Don Val talk you later. See you later today on Albert at noon The strangest, most unexpected places you've ever seen. An ad Terry O'Reilly is our guest. He of course The host of CBC is under the influence entering its fourteenth fourteenth Seasoned Fantastic. He's also the author of several books, including his latest This I know marketing lessons from under the influence. So, uh, this is a real treat for all of you to be on the air with him. And the question for you is ads in unusual places. What have you seen? What's stuck with you after all these years? One, eight, six, six, four, six, eight, four, four to two. All right, Terry, let's go straight to Gerston, who is in Edmonton today? Hello, Kirsten. Hi. Hi. What's the story you have to share with us? Well, first I want to say how much we enjoyed both of your shows and certainly the range of imaginative topic in interior Riley's program. Thank you, Beijing. We went to Beijing a couple of months ago. We were riding the subway and we noticed that the relates on the walls and we realized that there are projectors on the outside of the subway cars projecting billboard advertisements onto the tunnel walls. On. We thought, How clever to see the economic potential in the wall of a subway total. Right? That's very smart. I have not seen that. And would you not be going? So is it moving along with you person like, would you not be passing by? Duke moves along with you. So as you leave the station, it comes on as you enter the next station? It goes off. They were advertising mostly a banquet hall. Interesting. Render Banquet hall, huh? I've never seen that before. And how long ago was this? That you saw that in Beijing? Two months ago. Two months ago. Okay. Interesting. Yeah, well, here, Kirsten and Terry. Let me read you a quick email because it's sort of related from Mike. He says in my hometown of Hamburg, Germany, parking tickets have ads for local transit on the back, reading something like Skip the fine. Next time, take the bus. That's not clever. Very smart. Yeah. All right, Kirsten, thanks for your call. Glad you made it, Terry, before we wait to have a lot of people who want to talk to us. But before we get to some of those ads, tell us a little bit about what? I know you've been in the world of advertising for so long. But what? What? Drew you to it in the first place? There's a good question. First of all, I was in a commercial in nineteen. Sixty three, so I was on Romper Room as a kid. And one day after the taping of the show, the director said to my mom, Could we use Terry in a commercial in another studio? And my mom said, Sure, so they drag me into another studio and they were filming a commercial for a local bakery there, and I was four years old. Don't do the math in my age there, and that was my first, ah, blush at advertising. And I'm sure that stuck with me, Judy somewhere because it was so exciting for me as a kid. Then I went to Ryerson for radio and television, not exactly knowing where I wanted to end up, but I knew it would be in broadcast somewhere. And every Wednesday we would have a lecture class where somebody from the industry would come in to talk to us. You know, documentary filmmakers, anchor man, anchor, women, you know. And then one day, some advertising folks came in and said, Here's how we do our job And I sat in the back of that room and I saw my future. That was it. And was it just that, like the creative process that they were going through, That really drew you in or what it was that they said You know our business involves creative business solutions and coming up with creative ways to express a product and coming up with strategy and working with actors and photographers and film makers and being in recording studios and everything about that suited me right down to the ground. I loved it. And when you do shows like this and people call in and tell you about, are you like, Is it surprising to you that you haven't already heard of what of their stories? Or is it sort of breadth of advertising so, so broad that it really feels endless? It's well, I'm always surprised, like, in other words, that wonderful subway projecting on the walls of a subway that had never heard before. And I can't believe I haven't heard that because I'm always searching and reading about what's happening in my industry. But I'll say this Judy. The great thing about the marketing and advertising industry and why we've had fourteen years of shows is that coming up with episode themes is the easiest part of the show because there's so much happening it in the world of marketing. Interesting Eyes Welcome Terry Rights Ed and Admin Tinny sent in an email. I saw a sign above a urinal with Italy urinal theme going here in a restaurant washroom in Damascus, Virginia. Which Red? If you have been eating our hot wings, we recommend washing your hands before using the urinal. That's it. It took me a minute to get that way. I know that's good. A That's good. That's good. Better than playing urinal soccer. Or maybe not better, but that's still my favorite from last time. All right, Terry mentioned that story. If you didn't hear it, you have to listen to our podcast later on. Okay, I'll give out the phone number again. Will go to some calls. One eight six six four six, eight for four to two. That said to medicine Hat Dave with us from there. Hello, Dave. Hey, how's going, Tio? It's going great. Yeah. Having good fun here. What's that? What's the story you wanted to share with us on? Well, every week there's a group of voice actors that get together and on the video streaming service twitch. They played Dungeons Dragons and you can watch them and hang out with him. Um, one of the the voice actors plays a character who was a cobbler. Now goblins in the world are only about two to three feet tall, but his goblin is an alcoholic, so she carries a flask. So in real life, while you're sitting there watching him play, he has a giant flask that's probably about two feet tall by a foot and a half wide. And every week when you watch, they have either an advertisement for one of their sponsors on the front of the flask that's facing the camera. Or maybe one of the charities that they happen to be sponsoring that week on the front of the class. And I just I was every week, thousands people tune in and they wonder, what's all this black this week? What interest thing? So, you know, inching. Yeah, you know, to expect it. Now, everybody. And yet people will join in. And maybe he'll be early. Keeps the beverage in the flask as well. But they told me, if you can't see what's on, people ask what's on it, what's on it. And then people to himto see that every week. So interesting. All right. Thanks for that, Dave. Thank you. Yeah, I haven't email that are actually came as a tweet from a mark Who has a question for you, Terry. Not sure if Terry would mind addressing this, but I'm curious to hear his thoughts on the pushback on advertising. A lot of people are using ad blockers or switching to streaming to avoid advertising is the power of marketing on a decline. And what can be done about this? Well, that is a huge problem in the industry in a huge area of concern, because there are so many ways now to block her skip or or fast forward through advertising. That's why, by the way, and be in advertising is becoming more popular. What we're talking about today's because once you get out of mainstream media that you don't have is much ad blocking technology at work. So that is the big concern with advertisers. How do you still get your message through? In a world of Netflix, where there are no ads? You know, it's It's tricky. It's difficult. When I started in the industry back in nineteen eighty one, there was no social media. There was no Netflix. She really had just the major traditional mediums and no way to really, other than the remote control was the on ly skip a ble technology at that time. So that's how much has changed. Yeah, someone wants to draw attention to the sea Troy ads on the Eiffel Tower. Do you know about this? Don't Guinness Book of Records recorded the Central and lights on the Eiffel Tower as the world's largest advertisement. So its scales the whole tower? Yeah, it appears from this from this photo that they have sent us that's right. Sort of lit up the whole Tower way Did an episode last season on Guinness Book of World Record breaking ads. That wasn't one of them. But we did a whole episode on that. What? Can you remember any of them right now? Kentucky Fried Chicken did an ad out in the desert in the In the U. S. That was visible from space. It was that big. So it was the biggest ad, at least in North America. Maybe the world, but visible from space. Interesting. Yeah, someone wanted t comment on this, he says. Big fan of what you do for the ad industry. Terry. There you go. Some more props for you. Not sure if this qualifies. But I worked on the launch of a casino and we wanted to send this message attached to the streets and Edmonton client, unfortunately, got cold feet. We felt it represented truth in advertising to in one odds. That this bus hits a pothole is the ad that was on the bus, right? I guess the body it's going to hit a couple of potholes are pretty good odds there. That's That's kind of funny, though. We're playing right into what the casinos all about, you know, taking a game of chance. Yeah, absolutely. I wonder why the client got cold feet. Yeah, could sort of imagine, but yeah. Interesting. All right, that's you. No question. It was a question from Susanna. She she called in and told our director, Dave, that she wanted youto to comment about this is sort of taking conversation with a different direction, but it's very topical for today, with the midterms in the United States. Just political ads. If you have a sense of today's political advertising, particularly in the states, um, and and thought some some some of the ads that from last couple weeks or a couple months that might stick out for you well, that traditionally political parties loved to do negative advertising because they're always trying to, you know, flip and undecided voter. So there's a lot of negative advertising out there right now, and there always is in every election and even the federal elections that I have worked on in my life. The task coming down from the parties were almost always to do negative advertising, which I never loved doing. I never really believed in that. And I have to say that Justin Trudeau, when he ran his campaign, he kind of went the other way, which was quite brave of him to do. He really did kind of optimistic advertising and really, you know, look at the results of that election. So he really bucked the system there. But I think I think the big thing in elections is my personal opinion. I think it's really not so much the marketing of the of the politicians as muchas is getting the vote out. That you have a huge you may have a huge ah body of of supporters is just getting them to the polls. So really smart marketing is trying to get people to the polls. And you see that right now in the States? How much like it's just getting that way's vote? Yeah, right. Although it's also be afraid that if you don't vote one way Yeah, there's a lot of fear right there when the absolutely All right, well, Suzanna, thanks for listening in. And for calling in your question as well. Terry O'Reilly recognize his voice. Of course he is. Our guest for the hour is taking time out of his busy day to be with us to talk about all focusing mostly on sort of the most unusual places that you have seen ads in your life. So if you want to adjoin the conversation, we love Toe to hear from you. Of course, it's a one eight, six, six, four, six, eight, four, four to two. That's our tollfree line, no matter where you are in the province. Terry. A few minutes ago, someone called in telling us about the ads in Beijing through the subway, right. Those movies and someone a few people have mentioned that they have seen subway ads like that one as well on New York subways. Right, This is where they actually act like an animation times to the speed of the car. Each individual projection or poster is another slide, and it makes the ad appear like a video. And I was. I was in New York recently on the subway, didn't see any of that because I'm always looking around, so I didn't see that there. And also someone saying, in the early years of the Montreal Metro's life a unique motive. Advertising was used that cartoons depicting an advertiser's product were mounted on the walls of the tunnel at the level. So that's that's actually fixed, as opposed to a projection. But interesting. What looks like it's moving. Maybe when when you're moving that kind of stop action, well, you got a captive audience on the Metro with subway, right? Well, that's why. And that's interesting, because on buses and subways, because people are sitting for a period of time, you'll get longer copy ads there, by the way, because you have five, ten or twenty minutes to sit and stare. So they actually there's there's some writing on the ads or not just headlines. All right, let's go to David in Edenton. On the phone. David Hello. Oh, hi. Hi. What's the story you want to share with us? Well, this is a bit of nostalgia for some people That's old folks like me. Radio ads. I remember growing up with regular advertising on CBC radio, believe it or not, off on and in all the wa in the morning full of ah sponsored all the time checks. So really they it was always full of a watch. Time is eight fifteen. What is I I I enjoy both, By the way, post your programs and particularly the advertising analysis. But I just thought I'd toss this in case anybody else out here is. Yeah. Remembers that he was constantly on, and it still is. Now in my home. Well, I'm glad to hear it that you've been you've been around since the days when listening to us since the days of Bolivia. Wow. Billable supporting the time checks. All right, So love a watch. Time it struck with me. I wouldn't have bought the level watches. But, you know, Boulevard did the very, very first television ad in history. Really? What we had? Well, it was just a shot. Ah. Locked off shot of of a bull of a watch. And I think it was only about ten seconds long. But it was the first recorded television commercial in North America somewhere. I want to say it had to be in the advent of television, So it had to be probably there late forties there very, very early fifties. But Boulevard was the very first television advertiser. Interesting. Okay, I want to go right away to Glenn in Hidden because I think Glenn has a great story for us. Glenn. Hello. Hi. How are you today? We're doing great. Yeah. Radio Warm way r. I Actually, I have one really good one, but I just Well, I was listening to the gentlemen just a moment ago, but Bova, I was just thinking what about time? Next time. Ten after ten. That was always a good ad, you know, frame and frail. Time X, right. That's why it was Yeah, it framed the word time, so watches you. Yeah. Anyway, the one that I phoned in a boat was when we're travelling over in Asia in we were in Thailand for a while and think Cambodia. And of course, if no one's experience that they have their electrical wires up on poles and there's about four hundred wires, all tangled and going all kinds of directions. Not a real safe thing, but they put advertising there and we saw a big eight foot long comb. It was a break color and had Thai writing on it in Bangkok. And I asked a passer by that could speak English, and he says, Oh, it just says, if your hair is tangled, used this conditioner. Yeah, I've seen that. That's a brilliant, brilliant tank of power lines. Advertising banner. Yeah, tangled hair. So start my thought for the day. Yeah, that's a great one. You've heard of that one. You've heard of that one, Terry. I've seen pictures of that, too. It's And as Glen says, it's a complete tangle. Looks like a bird's nest of wires. But with the power company not have a problem with that with well, you'd think so, but I guess they say that might as well make some money off of it. Yeah, this revenue potential there? Yeah. Here's an email a rogue about the phone number Again. One, eight, six, six, four, six, eight, four, four, two, two. I think we have time for a few more calls in this hour of the show. Your chance to talk to Terry O'Reilly. One eight, six six four, six eight, four four to to let me read an email. Terry, that came in from Dale, who writes back in the late sixties and seventies. I remember looking through magazines for subliminal messages and print ads, which was said to be a thing back then in particular, I remember an ad in Life magazine for Marlboro cigarettes of a frontal picture of a cowboy on a horse with the most suggestive shadow on the horse's chest, extending down from between the cowboy's legs. And then Dale's question for you is where the stories of subliminal ads true able to tackle that one. Yeah, you know, I've long considered doing an episode on that. The problem I have with it is I don't believe it ever existed. So it's hard for me to write an episode on and let me say this. I mean, I think if you stare hard enough at ice cubes in ah glass, you're going to see something odd. But in all my years, I've almost been forty years in this business. The subject of subliminal advertising has never, ever, ever come up, not once. It's just I just don't believe it ever really existed to any extent in the advertising business. And so how did it become something that people thought exist? Well, remember Wilson? What was his name? Wilson. Brian Key Put out that book called Subliminal Advertising in the seventies, and he really he, you know, looked in the ice cubes and saw you know sexual imagery, and that book became a phenomenon in the seventies, and I think that's where all of that started. Interesting. So but a lot of the things he said were disproved by the way people were saying what they might want to see. Yeah, Dave in St Albert wonders if you think it's true. There's no such thing as bad publicity. You know, I struggle with that one, Judy, because there's a lot of instances where you know marketers get really bad press. All right, I think there is such thing as bad publicity. I think that sometimes things happen or brands make very bad decisions, and there's a hangover effect that's very negative. So just sure, you know, just a purely getting attention. Clearly, getting publicity is not always positive, so I don't think it's always good. I mean, this is came in an email Terry so afforded to you later on. I don't cause I don't know if you would have seen this. It is up. This email came from Keith, who's an aerial photographer, and he's flown over many very unexpected sites over the use. And this one was unusual. Ad placement from twenty twelve people in Alberta might remember this. It was the largest Q R code in the world, and it was carved into a family farm, the Kree Family Farm west of Lake Comb. And he says he just happened to fly by on a photo flight and red deer in Edmonton. We circled about my pilot, used his iPhone to see if he could read it. First attempt didn't work. But then we went up a thousand feet and it worked perfectly. Fully functioning. Q R Code was just recognized by the Guinness Book of World Records as the world's largest. That sounds like something the Guinness Book would be interested in. So it was cut into the field into the field. And I'm looking at the Cure is so elaborate and perfect. I'm not too sure what what? It was cut into what? The crop Wass. Right, But I'll support it to you. So smart. So huge. Yeah, so huge. What's the size here? Three hundred and nine thousand square feet. Good grief. Wow. Yeah. All right, We'll go back to the phones now. Cushy is in Edmonton. On the phone with us. Is she? Hi. How are you? And Well, thanks. Yeah. So, you know, I grew up in you. Grew up in India. Did you? Yes, I do. Okay. We'll share your story with us. Yes, I would liketo share my hasn't story, even if you're off black and white TV there. You know, the TV just came to our village on My parents used to take me to, like, in a mountain for our summer breaks and stuff. We were like at home. We were kind of bored watching advertisements that start off advertisement on TV on DH. Then we went to the mountains to live there, like for summer break the kids, they're washing TV and enjoying watching at and that there I learned first time we can enjoy watching as instead of getting war. Yeah, you know, they watch, like, as I'm the law out loud there is at our own home. We kind of get bored watching. As you know, we feel like in like in between show, if there is added kind of more like we're defected by the show. But when I watched those kids watching as they were, like Suri's board. But the ad are like, you know, interesting party. They're like Thea, like the first time I learned from those kids. Enjoy watching. Yeah, that sounds like my home. Judy, you have to be quiet during the commercials at my house. It not just the Super Bowl. All right, all right, Cushy. Thanks for your story. Okay, let's go. Quickly to Mike in Calgary. I think we have time for Mike. Just a few months left for the show, like, Hello. Hello. Are you Well, Thanks. Yeah. Jump right in with your story. For for Terry O'Reilly, My favorite fer fer. Add place. That is an old slapstick. Ah, a situation where the boxer was not very good at boxing. So his agent decided to sell the soles of his shoes. So he was laying flat on his back. You saw Hee that joke? E heard of that kind of thing before. That's very funny's funny. The poor boxer. Hilarious. No confidence. That's right. Oh, like that to remember who the boxer was? No, I don't remember that. Great story. Very funny, Right? Hear what I said? Yu is ah, read to you a tweet that came in Terry from someone runs a store called Wind Boy and I guess he says. We ran this advertisement and I'll describe it to the second in Fast forward newspaper, which was a former newspaper in Calgary. We were inundated. So the picture in the ad is a guy's all that sort of disheveled. He's lying on a park bench with a bottle, is sleeping on apartment. He's clutching a bottle of booze, and he says, We ran this advertisement and we were inundated with telephone calls Rip, reprimanding us for using homeless people to promote our wine store. But our answer was always the same. That guy works here with manager nieces. That's me lying on the bench. I wonder if that's quite the Yeah, that's funny. How about this one? Here? Remember the brick furniture store? He was shouting the ad. Remember that? Of course, there's still on, Are they? Yeah, yeah, but this woman says I will never set foot in a brick store because you know that that was part of their persona. Was their spokesperson who I still see on those ads. He's not shouting his lab, but he really did shout the entire copy. The entire script was showed it. That was her thing. That was your thing. Yeah, alright, here's another email from Debbie. I have a sense of humor, so I like ads that make me laugh. Right now, there's not on TV for Fountain Tire, and I feel like it demeans women. The supposed message is that the adult grandson who finds his tire flat has a grandmother where, as has a useless grandmother where's found tire is useful like us that didn't strike the tone, right? Debbie. Debbie was looking for that. That's the thing about advertising and humor to is, you know, it's very subjective, so it might be very funny. Toe half your audience and not funny to the other half. So it's a tough tightrope. All right, Terry. Well, what do you tell us that I know your season twenty nineteen season starts in January or it's in January. Okay, what were the first one be? We haven't decided yet. It might be this very subject we're talking about, and another one we're working on, which is interesting is AH, songs that have brand names in the lyrics and the funny stories and interesting stories like, for example, when three Kings put out Lola and there's a line in that is, everyone knows, saying it tastes like Coca Cola. And then they had to go into the studio and change it to Cherry Cola. But the reason behind that is very interesting. So that will be part of that show. I love it. All right, Terry. Thank you so much for spending the hour with us. Thanks to you, it was a lot of fun. Thank you, Terry. O'Reilly. You know the voice. He's the host of under the influence. You can hear the show, CBC, radio Thursdays and Saturdays at eleven. Thirty. And also, of course, you can subscribe to his podcast millions of downloads of that podcast every week. Well, the e mails and tweets keep pouring in. And although we won't have time to share them with you on the radio, we will read them. So know that everything you sent to us we do. We do have a chance to to read. So thanks for all of your input on today's program. And we started off today. Terry was sharing us, sharing with us some of the more unusual locations for ads that he's seen beards, bald heads, armpits in subways, urinals, lots of urinal story. So if you didn't catch all of those, you can always download our podcast on listenin to that part of the show. You confined our podcast just by Googling Albert at noon and we'll come up. All right, That's it for the show. I'm Judy. Aldous. Have a great Monday afternoon and we'll meet back here again Tuesday at lunch. We start your day for Mohr CBC podcasts go to cbc dot see a slash podcasts.