This is a CBC podcast. Hi, I'm Jamie. Puts on For the last decade, I've been a newspaper reporter, and lately I'm just finding it hard to keep up with the news. As of today, simple possession of marijuana is no longer illegal. It can be hard to make sense of things. Investigators spent nine hours in the consulate's appearance or murder. I want to change that. At least a little. I hope you'll join me for front burner at daily podcast from CBC News. Subscribe now wherever you get your podcasts. Hi there. I'm Alan Neil, and welcome to the All in a day podcast where every weekday we try to pick one conversation from today's edition of all in a day. So here's today's now three promising tech companies from Ottawa got some great news Just ahead of the holidays. <b>The Kanada based L Spark teamed up with BlackBerry Q. Nick's recently to create an accelerator program with seven spots up for grabs. They choose three local companies to work on autonomous vehicle technology</b> and you're true to the name. This is an accelerated process with the company's getting just six months to achieve great things. So joining me now in the studio are representatives from two of the winning Cos John Proctor is CEO of communication services for Martello Technologies. Stephen Borsa is CEO for cyber security company Blue Ink Limited, and Leo Lacks is here, too. He's executive manager with the director division of El Spark. Nice to have you guys all in studio this afternoon. With only six months, you won't have much time to spare, so I appreciate the time you've given us believe I want to start with you. Many of us still think of BlackBerry is the smart phone company that people, you know launched all that. But their research on autonomous vehicles has kind of taken over focus. What is the point of this partnership? So the key elements of the partnership is really a mechanism by which each of the groups are getting the benefit ofthe collaboration on a BlackBerry side. The Cue and Exide. They get access to innovation so fast moving ideas and companies that are going to putting together applications, they're going to be useful toe there and customer in some way. At the same time, the Little Cos the smaller companies who are joining the program are getting benefit from the platform that blackberry in Q Knicks have in a market. So your job was to locate suitable partners in this sphere that's got a rarefied the area of technology. What what were you looking for? What were the kind of criteria? So actually, in this particular case as a corporate accelerator, we worked with Q nicks to actually define the kind of companies that they were looking for in the early stage companies territory that they thought would be best fit, the areas that their customers would be looking at. So they were areas such as, of course, the autonomous vehicle area. Unix is also being used, and many of the utilities first generation networks as well as in a medical device area. So we put out our notices to say, anybody interested in building applications off those types that are built on this platform should come and see us. And they did. So you give me some sense How many people were knocking on your door when you put out the call? So that's a good questions. So we actually this was a fairly a fast paced programme. Over a two month period. We had about a hundred applicants out of which we selected, ten, who then presented their ideas, tow the BlackBerry and the Allspark team, and we selected out of those seven. Okay, so I want to bring in John and Stephen now on DH. I think what's needed at this point in a high tech conversation? Steven, Maybe in a simple way, you can tell me what it is your company can add to this to this team. Absolutely. Esso Blue Ink is a a cyber security company, digital identity company that uses your smartphone as a token to log you into everything. So a lot of people talk about password free Loggins. How do you do that? Wait. Do that with your smartphone, Basically type in a random identify WR that points to your phone. Your phone goes, Bing says. Approve logging into a website and we log you in. Simple as that, and we've just completed a proof of concept with the Ontario government to allow you to carry your driver's license, your health card, all of your IEDs on your phone and stuff in your wallet and use that ID to log into government websites or personal websites that you want to look into. And our next step in the identity everywhere is allow you to open your front door securely with the same identity and, in the case of this BlackBerry project, allow you to open a car door with your digital identity and allowed to be used for car sharing. So simply put, your phone will be your digital identity everywhere. I just five minutes before this interview, I went across the street to try to buy a coffee with no cash in my wallet, and my phone wouldn't pay for the coffee. I put it down on the reader, and it is your system going to work better than my phone did happen. Omar. It'll definitely okay. It'll death. Good cause we got locked out of your car because your phone goes dead. Something could be a problem. You can still use her key. OK, that's well, that's charge your phone. Okay, That's true, John. Same question free. What do you hope to bring to this incubator? This project, if you're so, what Martello does is make networks perform better. So when you got real time services like video conferencing, voice over I p any real time services, very sensitive networks. We just make that work across the Internet. What we're doing here is actually fairly complicated. Imagine this vehicle. You know, Autonomous vehicle driving along is gonna have multiple connections to Bell to Rogers to tell us we want to make sure that we've got the best connectivity for that network. It always stays up on. We're privatizing traffic, you know? Think about the autonomous vehicle. You know, if there's nobody driving, people are gonna be watching videos, playing games in the back, doing whatever. Well, what's the most important traffic coming out of the car? His security is making sure that vehicle is talking to the smart city. Is talking to the road is talking to other vehicles and not to the Netflix, sir. I'm not a Netflix server, so exactly. So we want to prioritise that to make sure that that always stays connected for the safety and security individuals inside the car. I don't suppose you're going to give away your white papers on this, but what's in it in a simple term? What's what's the challenge of that? How do you make a certain data packet? I guess prioritized over the other junk. The challenges really doing this speed, right? If I'm sitting in a building like this to sitting here, it can work out here's all the the the cell phone towers around me. I can connect to them. Great. But when you've never been on via rail, gonna Montreal, Toronto, your call drops because phones are designed to constantly battle over to sell to. You can't afford that in an autonomous vehicle. We want to make sure that never happens, and you always stay connected. I'll ask both Stephen and John. How old is your company? Were described to startups. But how recent is this beginning? So we're a sort of nine year overnight success. But again, sort of, You know, we went public this year, so I was kind of our sort of big pieces here. We wanted a few tech companies here in town to go public, so we're not, as a start up should be were still fairly small under a hundred people. But again, it's also part of going through the the process of BlackBerry. We've been identified. BlackBerries with Q and ex is something they need. And that was part of the process for us is to actually rather than build it and hope black, relax it were working with the black Rick. You're next team directly developed something they've already identified to develop something that actually fits very well into the program. Steven, how old is your company? So I incorporated the company back in two thousand ten and Maura's RND consultancy. I got tired of working for other people here that people tell me what to do. However, my past has always been product development and doing new things. So I got itchy feet a couple years in and started building products as well as doing the RND side. I had the opportunity to add a CTO to my company. Larry Hammond, who had worked with on a couple of different start ups over the years back in the nineties and the two thousands, and he joined me in twenty fifteen, and we re focused on digital identity space, which was actually what we've done in our past to companies and really, the phone as a password manager and phone is an authenticator to everything. What does on opportunity like this to work with BlackBerry and Ellis Park? What does it represent for your company? But I gather notice doesn't go up in Kannada saying, Hey, whatever technology working on we wanted because working in the special project that everyone's eyes are on, I gather it's a rare opportunity. What is it? What does it mean for your company? For us, that blue ink, it means our vision of doors to desktop security. So, as I said, being I'll open the front door on them being ableto log into a computer, we can achieve that with BlackBerry. You know, we looked at cars and said, Okay, how would you open occur while every car is different? But at the core of one hundred twenty million cars in the world is the BlackBerry Q and ex operating system So if we want to connect to the most cars from all different manufacturers, doing it through the queue and ex operating system is is the place for us to be toe Realize this vision and sixteen people in Ottawa, I can't address one hundred twenty million cars. But going through the Cuban ex operating system allows us to get global coverage that we could never achieve with a similar are kind of a access of scale for your company, too. Is that what you'd say about what it represents for you? Yes. And on top of that, it also access to the Cuban ex engineers and senior executives themselves, because again, you want to run inside their environment. So you need their expertise to come back to you and give guidance and advice. So having that in a programmatic way, where we know we reach out, we know we'll get responses. And we can have this back when board's eyes absolutely key to success in this. As you said, fairly short six months project. You guys are all dressed like businessmen, and so I know you'll have the manners of businessmen, but I think it's fair that you're staking your put this on the radio? Yeah, that one's going on their best manners, but it's got to be said, This is a leap of faith, You guys. We're putting a considerable number of eggs in this basket, and nobody knows the honest whether BlackBerry Q. Nix is the solution to autonomous cars as well. Experience meant fifty. Why make this this deal with this company now? Well, for us, we see the obvious first step is car sharing. So millennials young people, they're not running out on my neck are sixteen. They're either going to be a member of a car share service or say you could lease a vehicle and put it into a car share fleet and let your car be used. Paid off by someone else. Let them. You're driving for free If you let your car be used six days a month when you're not using it all of a sudden you're you have a cool car and it cost you nothing. So that's the sharing economy. Airbnb for cars is really our vision. And what about you? Why take this scandal with Kunitz? How do you mean? You're going to say something polite as I've already said because you were going to Jack and I can tell, but how do you know this is the right way? Well, again, it's your We're focused on autonomous vehicles, but Q and exes in other things as well. It's the Internet of things. So is that broader market as well? So muchas we're interested in the vehicles. If you could do this in a vehicle, you can do this in a train. You can do this in the aeroplane on, Then you're extending this into that smart city environment. So really it's, you know, Q. Necks. You know, they're focuses much. Is its autonomous vehicles here in Kannada. They're in many other spaces as well, so it's been able to step into that area as well. And when you make a deal with the else bark and the BlackBerry people, does it mean once thie incubated period is over, you're free to continue doing RD with other companies. Or how does that relationship work? After the sunset of the Thie incubator? I think the key really is someone had gone through the summer into the business terms. Right? Let's get this up and running. Then let's say Yes, it's working as it's not working and then start looking the business piece so much as you said, we've got to get the technology to work. We've also have the business piece that works as well to make sure that, you know, provide value to both sides. Leo, I wonder what you see is happening after six months of one. If you learned anything, this art, I think that these guys tell you what you wanted to hear or like What? This? Well, so there are a couple of things that really key to our environment here. One is all of the existing companies right now in the world. The major platform companies are no longer doing everything themselves. They all collaborate with others to ensure that they get the best of breed mechanism to do. There are difficult, so they need in intermediaries. That happened to that house. Park is one of those things. What we're getting out of this is building an ecosystem right here in Canada. Que nix is one of the shining lights in Canada, and we believe that by allowing our innovation groups connecting to the rest of the organizations and getting capabilities and clinics to grow them bigger were not only helping Q. Nixon the companies, but our entire ecosystem. It's fascinating. And I got to confess. It's rare that we get a chance to talk to the guys who were coming from cannot and working those big beige building. So fascinating you guys should come visit us more often. Were were you not aware, Jack? And Okay, I've never wearing a jacket again. Wei are Bronson and Gladstone's. Sorry, we're not in the west and you're way Prefer where we can get his restaurants on foot. Nice to meet you all. Thanks a lot for coming in this afternoon. Thank you. Pleasure. Thank you. Thanks for listening to the all in a day podcast. More stories from the show are available on our website cbc dot slash, all in a day. For more CBC podcasts, go to cbc dot see a slash podcasts.